foreign powers who signed treaties with it. The reason why the masters of Algiers could never contemplate breaking the links which united them to the Sublime Porte was that the organization of the state rested on the Janissaries, who could be recruited in the Levant only with the consent of the sultan. Rather than a real monarchy, the Regency continued to be a sort of republic dominated by the Turkish military elite. The quasi-colonial antagonism which existed between a minority of foreign masters and the indigenous masses prevented Algeria from becoming a real nation, and was a major weakness in its Turkish government. Although he held absolute power, the dey was nevertheless only one of the Janissaries (he continued to draw pay and a bread ration), elected from among his equals, and he had difficulty in escaping from the control of the militia, as was proved by the violent disturbances which occurred at the beginning of the century. In addition to his stipend, the dey received very many perquisites, such as fees for the investiture of important dignitaries, tribute from the beys, and presents from consuls, and he had at his command the public treasury. He had his own official house with a kha^naddr (treasurer), a turjumdn (interpreter), scribes and ushers. There had gradually grown up around him a sort of govern- ment, with five 'powers' {puissances) who performed the function of ministers: the kha^naji, in charge of the treasury, who was often chosen as the dey's successor; the agha of the sipdhis(pi of the mahalld) who was in charge of the land forces; the wakil al-kharj, a sort of minister of sea- power; the bayt al-malji, the steward of the dey's household; the khujat al-khqyl, who administered the territories of the Regency and received the tribute from the beys. The 'agha of the two moons', the chief of the militia, held only a secondary and representative role, as did the Divan of about sixty members, who in principle elected the dey, and from whom the majority of the high officials were chosen. A certain number of clerks (sing., khiijd) kept the principal registers, and attended to the correspondence. The militia which dominated and exploited the state was recruited in 281 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008AFRICA AND THE MUSLIM WEST the Levant, for the most part in Anatolia. On his arrival in Algiers, the Janissary private was entered in the registers of the militia, in which were later recorded his increase in pay and his promotions. The Janissaries were divided into 424 groups of about twenty men, distributed into rooms (sing., odd) within eight barracks. Their active service was divided into garrison duty and service in the field. The j/oldasb very often followed a trade, and, with increasing frequency, married Algerian girls; but their children, the Kuloghlus, were not admitted to the militia until a later date, and they remained excluded from the highest offices, and from the majority of the prerogatives of the pure Turks. As the ojak was renewed by recruitment from outside, it did not in Algeria form a hereditary aristocracy. To these Turkish forces were added Turkish and Arab cavalry sipahis, paid Kabylian troops, and contingents of cavalry supplied by the Makh^an tribes. Privateering almost disappeared after 1815; the Algerian fleet, destroyed by Exmouth in 1816, and later involved in the Turkish naval disaster at Navarino, consisted in 1827 of no more than about ten ships. The administration of the country was characterized by a great local variation in administrative usage, and by a wide decentralization, which even extended to a semi-autonomy for the professional, religious or ethnic groups. The Regency was divided into four provinces. That of Algiers (Ddr al-Sultdn) came directly under the authority of the dey. The three others were governed by beys: the beylik of Titteri (Titarl) with its capital at Medea, the first in rank but the smallest in size, the beylik of the West with its successive capitals at Mazouna, Mascara and Oran; and the beylik of the East (Constantine). The beys, who were appointed and dismissed by the dey, had around themactual little govern- ments, andhadarmed forces at their disposal for police operations. They enjoyed wide powers, and some of them were very important persons. Algiers supported them by sending three maballas (expeditionary forces) a year, in return for which it expected them to send regular tribute, which was brought twice a year by the lieutenant {khalifa) of the bey, and once every three years by the bey himself. The insufficiency of the tribute was a frequent cause of the dismissal of the beys. The provinces were themselves divided into watans administered by qd'ids, who were appointed and usually Turks, and by shaykhs, who were elected. But the actual situations varied greatly between the Makb^an tribes, which contributed to the police, supplied military contingents and enjoyed various privileges in return, and the regions which were partially or 282 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008NORTH AFRICA: PRE-COLONIAL PERIOD totally independent, such as Kabylia or the Aures. Where they were unable to install an effective local administration, the Turkish authorities (whose actual control extended over only a part of Algeria) made use, according to the circumstances and their relative strength at the time, of severity, diplomacy or cunning, for example in taking advantage of the divisions among clans, or ethnic or religious quarrels. The basic taxes, which weighed especially heavily on the peasants, were traditionally the tithe ('usbfir) on the harvests, the %akat on animals, the la%ma, a sort of poll-tax which replaced the tithe in Kabylia and in the south, and the khardj paid by the ra'iyya (subject peoples) in conquered territories. The tribes, who in greater or less degree escaped the govern- ment's authority, were made to pay a tax in kind or in money, the gharama. To these taxes, which moreover varied according to the region, were added many other taxes and arbitrary levies. The dey's resources (tributes from the provinces, fees and other perquisites) supplied the budget of the regency. The expenses consisted basically of the pay of the militia, for the officials bought their appointments and afterwards recouped themselves with perquisites, while much of the expenditure on matters of public interest, such as worship and education, was met by private initiative. The dey's treasury seems to have been well filled: it is estimated at ioo million francs in 1830. This system possessed undoubted advantages which were due to its very simplicity: the pay- ments in kind, which were very frequent, were less onerous on the taxpayers, and well adapted to a country lacking in specie, while they provided direct support for the high officials. Nevertheless, because of much waste in the fiscal system and the exactions which were added to the normal levies, the taxation was heavy without in fact contributing very much to the state. Of the probably three million inhabitants of Algeria in 1830, the rural population represented more than nine-tenths. Because of methods and equipment which in general were rather primitive, and a complex and unsatisfactory system of land-tenure little more than the absolute minimum was produced. It is true that agricultural techniques were well adapted to natural conditions, and that the produce was destined mainly for consumption by a relatively small population: there was much arable soil, which allowed the extensive use of the land by the tribes in the grazing of sheep and goats. life in the towns seems to have decreased at the end of the period of Turkish rule: there were few real towns apart from Algiers (30,000 inhabitants), Constantine (12,000) and Oran 283 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008AFRICA AND THE MUSLIM WEST (9,000). The urban population differed profoundly from the rural population, as much in the diversity of its composition (Turks, Moors and Kuloghlus all lived there and sometimes quarrelled; there were also substantial Muslim minorities, Mzabites, Kabyles, and large Jewish communities) as in the variety of its occupations: artisans, traders and 'ulama'. The artisans disposed of a relatively restricted internal market, and limited themselves to the processing of agricultural products, and the manufacture of objects of everyday use. They did not contribute to Algerian exports, and internal trade was hampered by the lack of geo- graphical unity of the Regency, the difficulty of communications and the diversity of weights and measures in use. Foreign trade, based on the sale of a few raw materials (wheat, oil, animals) and the purchase of manu- factured products (cloth) and some foodstuffs (sugar, coffee) remained rather small in volume. Its profits were concentrated in the hands of some European merchants and a few Andalusian1 and Jewish families. The concentration of political power exclusively in the hands of a foreign ruling class, and the often brutal exploitation of the population would to a certain extent justify the description of the Turkish regime in Algeria as 'colonial' if there had not existed between governors and governed strong links, such as the possession of a common religion, culture and social structure, which covered over the antagonism and if, furthermore, any idea of a massive human colonization or of exclusive exploitation of the land had not been completely foreign to the Turkish conquerors. Because of this ambiguity, the revolts of the people against the excesses of the Turkish domination could not assume a truly nation- alist character. The Turks had founded the territorial framework of Algeria, but it was French colonization, established on the ruins of Ottoman domination, which was, through the country's reaction, to form the Algerian nation. The origin of the French expedition of 1830 is found in the very in- volved affair of the credits held by Jewish merchants in Algiers, for deliveries of grain made to France between 1793 and 1798, partly thanks to the money lent by the dey. Husayn Dey attempted for several years to get his demands heard in Paris, but without success. Finally, tired of the procrastinations of the French government and of the insolent behaviour of the consul Deval, the dey gave the latter the famous 'blow with the fly-whisk', which caused diplomatic relations to be broken off (29 April 1827). There followed three years of blockade of 1 By 'Andalusian' is meant the descendants of Muslim refugees from Spain. 284 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008NORTH AFRICA: PR£-COLONIAL PERIOD Algiers with very little result, interspersed with unfruitful negotiations. In August 1829 the French truce ship was fired on by cannon from Algiers, which put an end to the negotiations. The Polignac government, which had at one time considered using Muhammad 'All Pasha to conquer the Maghrib, then decided to send an expedition against Algiers (31 January 1830). Actually it was less con- cerned to defeat Algiers than to succeed in a matter of internal politics: it intended by reinforcing the prestige of the monarchy with a success which it hoped would be outstanding, to strangle the opposition, and obtain favourable elections. It was only the business circles of Marseilles which were truly interested in the actual colonization of Algeria. From 14 June 1830, 37,000 men were landed at Sidi Ferruch near Algiers. On the 19 June the Algerian forces attacked the expeditionary force at Staweli, but were defeated. On 29 June the French army resumed its march on Algiers, and on 4 July it occupied the Emperor Fort which commanded the town. Negotiations entered into with some of the important officials ended in the capitulation of the dey, who accepted the conditions of General de Bourmont. On 5 July at 12 o'clock French troops occupied Algiers. This success came too late to save the Restoration monarchy, and France found itself engaged in a colonial enterprise which it had neither really wanted nor seriously prepared. TUNISIA Husaynid Tunisia to i8}0 The capture of the Bey Ibrahim al-Sharif by the Algerian troops produced a profound reaction in Tunis, where the memory of the two expeditions of 16 8 6 and 1694 was still quite fresh. The unanimity with which the high officials, the officers of the militia and the important citizens of Tunis entrusted the vacant office to the agha of the Turkish sipahis, Husayn b. 'All, considered to be the most capable of saving Tunis, can be regarded as one of the first manifestations of national awareness in Tunisia (Rabi' I 1117/July 1705). Husayn, the son of an Ottoman trooper, born in Candia, who had settled in Tunisia and founded a family there, justified this confidence: before the end of the year 170 5, the Algerian troops, aban- doned by their allies among the Tunisian tribes, were forced to recross the frontier. Soon afterwards Husayn b. 'Ali thwarted an attempt by the Dey Muhammad Khuja al-Asfar to seize power. The absolute power 285 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008AFRICA AND THE MUSLIM WEST which the bey held from then on was later to be sanctioned by the Porte, which issued a firman entrusting to him the government of Ifriqiya (i 708). A later attempt by the Porte to re-establish its authority in Tunis failed completely (1127/1715), and after this it contented itself with the demonstrations of submission which reached it from this distant province, without contesting the semi-autonomy which its rulers enjoyed. After the long period of disturbances at the end of the eleventh/ seventeenth century, Tunisia first experienced under Husayn b. 'Ali a period of calm in which to recover. The construction by this bey of very many buildings of public utility (wells, cisterns, reservoirs, bridges), markets and places for worship and education (three madrasas in Tunis and several in the towns of the interior), is evidence of this effort at reconstruction. It was particularly active at Qayrawan, which had been destroyed by Murad Bey: the walls were rebuilt and a madrasa and two markets erected. The solidity of the Husaynid monarchy was put seriously to the test during the second quarter of the eighteenth century, during a series of crises which partook of the double character of dynastic struggles and foreign wars. Their origin was the frustrated ambition of Husayn's nephew, 'Ali Pasha, who had been deprived of the succession to the throne by the late birth of the bey's sons (Muhammad in 1711 and 'Ali in 1124/1712). Their seriousness arose from the help which the claimants received in Algiers, where every opportunity was seized to reassert the vassal status of the neighbouring Regency while obtaining profit from it in the form of tribute or of the spoils of war. The failure of the first revolt of 'Ali Pasha having obliged him to seek refuge in Algiers in 1729, the prince succeeded in persuading Ibrahim Bey to support his cause. The Algerian troops marched on Tunis and installed 'Ali Pasha there (September 1735). Husayn and his sons continued the struggle in the Sahel and at Qayrawan until the town was taken and the beydied(i6 Safari 153/13 May 1740). It was now the turn of his sons to seek refuge and support in Algeria. A prince of ostentatious tastes (witness his buildings of the Bardo, which had become the habitual residence of the beys) and an enlightened ruler (he was responsible for four madrasas in Tunisia), 'Ali Pasha had to fight in order to impose his authority. The revolt for which he had been responsible resulted in the permanent division of Tunisia into two parties (sing., saff), the Husayniyya and the Bashiyya, whose opposition was in fact based on earlier quarrels. In particular the bey had to subdue 286 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008NORTH AFRICA: PRE-COLONIAL PERIOD powerful tribal confederations on the Algerian frontier in the south of the country. His own son, Yunus, revolted against him in 1165/1752. Above all he had to face the danger from Algeria which reappeared this time in support of Husayn's sons. The Algerian expedition of 115 9/1746 failed, but in 1169/17 5 6 the Algerians seized Tunis, and sacked the town. 'AH Pasha was put to death, and the Husaynis were re-established, though not without experiencing some difficulty in ridding themselves of the encumbrance of their protectors. The crises which 'All Pasha had had to face (and to which there had been added in 1742 a conflict with France, after the recovery of Tabarqa from the Genoese) had obliged him to increase the man-power of the Turkish militia, in spite of the little confidence that he placed in it, especially since the revolt of 115 6/1743. After 1756 the descendants of Husayn b. 'AH succeeded one another almost without incident: Muhammad Bey (1169/1756), 'Ali Bey (1172/ J759)» Hammuda Bey (1196/1782), 'Uthman Bey (1229/1814), Mahmud Bey (1230/1814), Husayn Bey (1239/1824), Mustafa Bey (1251/1835). Contrary to the normal order of succession, however (by order of seniority within the family of the bey) 'Ali Bey had his son Hammuda (born 1173/1759) as his successor, passing over Mahmud, his nephew (born 1170/175 7); 'Uthman, having succeeded his brother Hammuda in 1814, was assassinated soon afterwards, and Mahmud finally came to the throne after having been twice frustrated. The Husaynid beys eradicated the traces of the disturbances which Tunisia had suffered. The severe punishment meted out to the turbulent population of the Ousseltia, which was expelled from its jabal and dis- persed (175 9-62), served as an example, and for half a century there was no serious revolt in Tunisia. The second rebuilding of Qayrawan, which had been destroyed by Yunus, is a positive example of this effort towards internal reconstruction. Under 'Ali and Hammuda the country experienced a certain economic prosperity, which was somewhat marred by a series of natural disasters, in particular the epidemics of plague in 1783-5 andi8i8-2o. During the disturbances of the following century, the reign of Hammuda, that' Tunisian Charlemagne' was often referred to as a golden age. On several occasions the beys affirmed their quasi-autonomy in their relations with the Porte. Hammuda did this with a certain amount oiiclat, first by intervening on his own account in Tripoli, to re-establish the Qaramanli dynasty there (1794-5), then by his obvious unwillingness to break with France in 1798. This same bey attempted to free Tunis from its humiliating situation as a tributary of 287 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008AFRICA AND THE MUSLIM WEST Algiers. Hammuda's expedition of 1807 against Constantine was not successful, but the victorious resistance of the Tunisian troops near the frontier (14 July 1807) marked the end of Algerian raids into Tunisia until the definitive peace could be signed, under the auspices of the Otto- man government, in March 1821. In its relations with the European powers, a fair number of which had concluded direct treaties with it (16 in 1816), the Regency also held its own: offering resistance to France in 1770, standing up to the Venetians in 1784-6, pursuing a privateering war against the smaller maritime powers, or exacting from them humiliat- ing tributes or gifts. It was not until September 1819 that the action of the powers taking part in the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle forced the bey permanently to abolish privateering. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, the Husaynid beys had become Tunisian princes, Arabic in language and culture, who often allied themselves in marriage with the great families of Tunis. The office of chief minister was filled by Tunisians as well as by mamliiks: among them were the shaykh and historian Ibn 'Abd al-'Aziz (under 'All Bey and Hammuda Pasha), the al-Asram, natives of Qayrawan who were hereditary bash kdtibs, or Muhammad al-'Arabi Zarruq, under Mahmud Bey. The Turkish militia declined rapidly after 1750: in spite of the caution with which Hammuda Pasha treated them, it was quite clear that the troops had lost all political influence. It was perhaps an attempt to regain it which led them to revolt in 1811 and 1816. These revolts, and the vigorous repression which followed them, only hastened the deca- dence of the militia, while the beys naturally tended more and more to have recourse to the local troops. Thus was completed, shortly before the occupation of Algiers, the evolutionary process which had trans- formed the Regency of Tunis, dominated by the Turkish ojak, into a quasi-monarchic national state. The political and administrative structure of the state of Tunisia immediately before the conquest of Algeria was at the same time very primitive, if we consider the means employed, and very complex, if we take into account the great variety of institutions which had been inherited from the ancient or the more recent past. Whatever may have survived of Ottoman rule, the bey was, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, practically an independent ruler. The hereditary character of the rdgime was in no way affected by the formality of the double investi- ture (bay1 a) which associated the Divan and the important dignitaries with 288 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008NORTH AFRICA: PRE-COLONIAL PERIOD the environment of the ruler, nor by the request for investiture by the sultan, which was granted automatically, carrying with it the title of pasha, and regularly renewed. There were only a few external signs which continued to witness to the fact that in principle the bey was a vassal: it was in the name of the sultan that coins were struck, and that the khutba was said. The fact was also still expressed in some demon- strations of respect, and in occasional military aid: some Tunisian squadrons joined the Ottoman fleet in 1821 and 1826, which resulted in the destruction of the Tunisian navy at Navarino. Apart from this the bey governed without reference to the Porte. Even the use of Turkish, which had been a symbol of belonging to the Ottoman world, was abandoned in treaties about 1830 and in correspondence with Istanbul in 1838. Without officially possessing the title of ministers (it was Ahmad Bey who first appointed wa^trs) or exactly their functions, a certain number of high officials surrounding the bey did in fact hold this sort of posi- tion: the sahib al-tdbi' (keeper of the seals), who was often the chief minister; the kha^nadar (treasurer); the hdhiya (commander of the troops); the kdhiya of La Goulette, who was also amln al-tarsakhana (director of the arsenal), in charge of the navy and of foreign affairs. The chief secretary (bash kdtib) also played an important role in the bey's entourage, for he had in his hands all the correspondence of the Regency; he was assisted by Arabic and Turkish secretaries, about ten in number, but enough for the business to be transacted. To fulfill important political functions and to command the troops, the beys chose mamluks, slaves who were bought in the East and brought up in the palace. In this way they assured themselves of a staff which was relatively competent and generally loyal: the beys gave Husaynid princesses in marriage to the most important of them. The mamluks formed a caste, the highest rank of which was occupied by the Qr- cassians and the Georgians, who had the greatest contempt for their Greek and Italian fellow-slaves (who had become very numerous at the beginning of the nineteenth century), and also for the native Tunisians, whom the exercise of the functions oikatib assured of a certain amount of influence over affairs. The Tunisians had also the monopoly of the judicial and religious offices, but the traditional jurisdiction of the qadis and of the majlisshar'i (religious court) suffered competition from the justice which was dispensed by the bey and a number of high officials. 289 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008AFRICA AND THE MUSLIM WEST The Turkish personnel which had formerly governed the Regency no longer played more than a secondary or honorary role; an example was the dey, who had become a sort of chief of police in Tunis, or the former chief of the militia, the agha al-kursi, or the formerly all- powerful Divan. This decline was reflected in that of the militia, which in about 1830 consisted of scarcely more than 2,500 men. The rulers, who surrounded themselves by a guard of mamluks (four odas of twenty-five men) employed mainly native troops (3,000 re- cruited in Kabylia, four ojaks of 500 Arab sipahis) and, in case of need, contingents furnished by the Makh^an tribes. The regular army, re- duced for reasons of economy to about 7,000 men, was of mediocre quality, but nevertheless sufficient to impose order on the tribes, who were even worse armed (and above all lacked cannons) and very poorly disciplined. To establish his authority in the interior of the country, collect taxes and maintain order, the bey sent two annual columns (sing., mahalld), one in summer to the west, and the second in winter to the south. The local administration was entrusted to governors (sing. 'ami/, qa'id) who bought their offices and subjected their provinces to an exploitation which was limited only by their concern not to be removed from office and divested of their spoils by the bey. The hold which the government had over the populations, which was exercised through elected shaykhs, varied according to the regions: it was strong in the settled agricultural regions near to the capital and in the Sahel of Sousse, and weak in the mountain areas and in the steppe, which were under the domination of the great tribes. The calm and stability which the country had enjoyed since 1169/1756 had brought with it a relative economic prosperity which showed itself in various ways: a tendency for the tribes to settle in the high steppes, the formation of new villages, an increase in the cultivation of olive trees in the neighbourhood of Sfax, and an extension of the area of cultivated land (about 750,000 hectares, were under cultivation in about 1840). The country continued to live according to the rhythm of the traditional commercial currents: north-south exchanges between the nomads with their flocks and the growers of wheat and of olives, relations with the Sahara and trade with Algeria and the Levant, in which the local artisan class still played an important part (e.g. the making of 'chechias', woollen caps, which employed 15,000 persons in the eighteenth century, the manufacture of woollen cloth and leather goods). 290 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008NORTH AFRICA:PRE-COLONIAL PERIOD Foreign trade was expanding and the exports (mainly of oil from the Sahel) definitely exceeded the imports. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, however, there appeared an increasing number of signs pointing to economic and financial difficulties. The abolition of privateering in 1819 had certainly affected the bey's finances, although its role in Tunis had never been of more than secondary importance. More serious for Tunisia had been epidemics and famines which had impoverished and depopulated it. Following the example of Hammfida, the beys attempted to obtain new resources from a policy of monopolies, which hindered trade and was a burden on agriculture. Some efforts were made to improve the system of taxes (which were made heavier by the abuses and the extortions of the qd'ids) and, to encourage the peasantry; there was introduced (in November 1819) a tithe i^ushiir) on the produce of the olive plantation of Sousse, in place of the fixed qaniin, and in 18 2 5 a reform in the system of collection of the tithe on cereals. But the results were not what the beys had hoped. In about 1830, the farmers of the Sahel, overwhelmed by a series of bad harvests, and by the harmful consequences of the commer- cial monopoly of oil, were on the brink of ruin: the crisis produced the downfall of the minister, and cost the government heavy indemnities to the French merchants. About the same time, monetary difficulties led Husayn Bey to devalue the riyal (piastre) yet a little further. The meagre profit which this operation brought him was largely cancelled out by the aggravation of the monetary and economic troubles: the piastre con- tinued to fall in value, and gold and silver coins became very scarce in the country. The crisis which was beginning to affect the Regency was in part the effect of European commercial penetration, which was to increase after 1830. Sea trade, which was relatively extensive from Tunisia, took the form of an exploitation of its natural, agricultural resources by the Europeans and their local agents, who had this trade under their control and received all the profit from it. Whereas Tunisia was strengthening most of her commercial relations with Europe (whose merchant navies held a monopoly of the Mediterranean traffic), the traditional outlets towards the Maghrib and the Near East were declining, and with them the economic activity which supplied them, the products of the artisan classes. The break-up of the Ottoman empire in the Mediterranean, beginning with the French conquest of Algiers, was to accelerate the political and economic decline of Tunisia. 291 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008AFRICA AND THE MUSLIM WEST Tunisia in the nineteenth century from the reforms to the protectorate The Algerian expedition was welcomed by the bey of Tunis who at first saw it only as an event which rid him of hated neighbours: he even considered joining with France in the reorganization of the neighbour- ing Regency. Negotiations led to the project of installing in Constantine and Oran Tunisian princes, tributaries of France. After beginning at Oran, the enterprise was interrupted, the French government having refused to ratify the agreements (1831). In reality a new era was begin- ning for Tunisia. Isolated, especially from the world to which she had belonged for ten centuries, after the occupation of Constantine in 1837, Tunisia gradually changed into a mere commercial dependency of Europe, to the detriment of its traditional economic equilibrium. Further, the beys tried to counter the political pressure which was exerted directly on them by an attempt at reconstruction and progress which was only to accelerate the process of internal disintegration. The diplomatic situation of the Regency was immediately and pro- foundly altered by the conquest of Algiers. In Paris (and still more in Algiers) it was thought that Tunisia was destined to fall sooner or later under French influence, and that it was in France's interest to maintain there a weak and isolated authority: thus French policy tended to break what remained of the links between Tunisia and the Ottoman empire, to consolidate Tunisian autonomy, envisaged as a state of quasi- independence. On the other hand Great Britain, alarmed at the progress of French influence, was led, in order to protect effectively the status quo in Tunis, to advocate a rapprochement with the Porte, and tried to make the somewhat theoretical dependence of the beys into a reality. At the same time, because of the re-establishment of their authority at Tripoli (1835), the Ottomans were in a favourable position to defend their rights in Tunis, and eventually to try to consolidate their position there. The beys (and in particular Ahmad Bey), who were truly alarmed by the pressure from France but who were also anxious to stress their autonomy, were forced by circumstances to play a diplomatic game, the subtlety of which was apparent ini836andi837 when French squadrons appeared off Tunis, ostensibly to prevent the Ottomans from repeating there the operation in which they had succeeded at Tripoli. The same situation later recurred almost every year. In the end, as France's ideas on the status of Tunis were more realistic, and above all closer to the wishes of the beys, and as in addition she was in a position to exert an 292 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008NORTH AFRICA: PRE-COLONIAL PERIOD almost irresistible pressure on Tunisia, it was French policy which prevailed. Tunisia continued to detach itself progressively from the Ottoman empire, at the risk, should the British policy change, of finding herself alone face to face with France. The attempts at reform in Tunis, as in Egypt and Turkey, at first took the form of modernization of the army. In 18 30, Husayn Bey had asked for and obtained help in modernizing his troops: thus there were organized the first Ni^amt units, for the creation of which he requested the Porte's approval after the event (1831). This effort was later con- tinued at great expense by the minister, Shakir, an admirer of Muham- mad 'All Pasha, and in particular by Ahmad Bey (1837-55) when he came to power. The formation of a European-style army appealed to his liking for prestige, and was intended to serve his main ambition—to obtain the recognition of the quasi-independence of Tunisia, and to have it respected by the Ottomans. Thus within a few years seven regiments of infantry, two of artillery and one of cavalry were formed, although the quality and the number of these troops did not entirely correspond to the bey's hopes, or to the financial expenditure authorized. Greatly influenced by the example given by Egypt, the bey established a military school in the Bardo (March 1840), and tried, but without much success, to create an industry to support his military effort by a textile mill, a gunpowder factory and a foundry. However modest this army was (not more than about 10,000 men), it was still disproportionate to the resources of the country: military expenditure ended by absorbing two thirds of the budget. In addition Ahmad Bey allowed himself to spend money on luxuries, such as the building of a Tunisian 'Versailles' at the Muhammadiyya near Tunis. He was the victim of European adventurers, or of high officials who pilfered from the treasury. Tunisia thus resorted to financial expedients and seemingly attractive yet disastrous enterprises, such as the creation of a bank and of paper money in 1847, which were to lead to catastrophe. About 18 5 2 it was threatened with bankruptcy: the flight to France of Mahmud b. 'Ayyad, the concessionary of the majority of the farms and monopolies, taking with him considerable state funds, and the effort made in 18 5 4 to send some 10,000 men to the aid of the sultan, helped to make the situation even worse. This rather disorganized attempt at progress was not however entirely without results. It was Ahmad Bey who by degrees abolished slavery between 1841 and 1846, and who put an end to the humiliating 293 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008AFRICA AND THE MUSLIM WEST position of the Tunisian Jews. The School of the Bardo produced an elite of officers and high officials with modernist ideas, while even the teaching at the great mosque of the Zaytuna was reorganized in 1842. The bey persistently refused to adopt the Ottoman Tanzimat because of the diplomatic implications of such a decision; but he did not deny that reform was necessary. The foreign influences to which he opened his country (his visit to Paris in 1846 was from this point of view a parti- cularly spectacular gesture), and the more exact knowledge of the modern world which the Tunisians obtained in the course of many missions to Europe, helped to increase Tunisia's progress. The period of the real reforms began with Muhammad Bey (1855- 9) who was a traditionalist ruler, but anxious to improve the lot of his subjects. He began his reign by replacing a certain number of taxes by one single tax, the 'subsidy' (i'ana or majbd) of 36 piastres a year (1856), and by abolishing certain abuses in the collection of the tax in kind. But it required the joint pressure of the French and British consuls which was made possible by the temporary rapprochement between France and Great Britain, to force the bey to adopt, on 10 September 1857, the Fundamental Pact ('Abd al-amdri), which was the starting point for actual political reform. Inspired by the Ottoman Tanzimat, the text granted to all Tunisians, Muslims and Jews, equal guarantees and rights, and accorded to foreigners the right to hold property in Tunisia. The reformist movement then continued under the impetus of a modernist elite (among them the minister Khayr al-Din Pasha al-TunisI and the historian and minister Ibn Abi'l-Diyaf) and under the vigilant control of the consuls, who expected it to facilitate foreign economic penetration. In 1857 there was established a Commission of Reforms, and in August 1858 a Municipal Council at Tunis. The accession of Muhammad al-Sadiq (18 5 9-82), more definitely modernist than his predecessor, gave new impetus to the movement. After founding the official journal of Tunisia (al-Ra'id al-Tunist), and promulgating the law on recruitment (March i860) and the decrees on the organization of Tunisian ministries (February and April i860), the bey proclaimed in January 1861 a constitution which established a limited monarchy, the bey sharing his legislative powers with a Grand Council (al-Majlis al-akbar) of sixty members; regular tribunals were to be instituted, with legal codes based on European models. This was an experiment without precedent in the Ottoman world. Some of the foreign powers which had advocated modernization found 294 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008NORTH AFRICA: PRE-COLONIAL PERIOD in practice that an assembly in which the public interest had spokesmen was less malleable than an absolute potentate: the granting of new con- cessions and privileges encountered serious difficulties. Furthermore the Tunisians, inspired by their attainment of civilization and progress, demanded that foreigners should henceforward come under the juris- diction of the regular tribunals, a claim which the majority of foreign governments would not accept. While France and Italy opposed the reforms more and more openly, Great Britain was the only country to support the development of the new institutions. She signed in 1863, a convention with the bey which, in exchange for the freedom to trade granted to the British, submitted them to the lex loci. Within Tunisia, the reform policy also encountered great difficulties: it disturbed the habits of the peasantry and bedouin (particularly in matters of justice); there was a lack of loyal and competent officials to make the new in- stitutions work: finally the majority of the 'ulamd' were hostile to these innovations. But it was primarily the financial difficulties, with their international implications, which caused the policy of reform to collapse. The beys aggravated the financial crisis by launching into expenditure of doubtful value, sometimes suggested by untrustworthy European businessmen. In order to obtain the money it required, the government at first borrowed locally at usurious rates of interest. Then it turned to Europe. In 1863 the bey borrowed from the banking house cf d'Erlan- ger in Paris. He actually received a small proportion of the nominal sum, and it was soon dissipated. In need of money once again, the bey decided to double the majba. This measure brought the country's dis- content to a head: in the spring of 1864, the great tribes of the centre of the country refused to pay the tax, and the revolt became general. The revolution of 1864 was more than a mere bedouin revolt. The rebels presented a list of precise complaints and chose leaders among themselves. The movement spread to the region of the Sahel, and, in the coastal towns where the European penetration had made itself most felt, it took on an indisputably nationalist character. The revolution failed, however, for lack of unity and clear perspectives. It was nevertheless to have considerable consequences. First of all the bey made it the pretext for bringing the reforms to an end, as he was in any case being encouraged to do by the French consul. The military efforts and then the repression hastened the financial and economic ruin of the country. In 1865 the government contracted a second loan, still more disastrous than the first. The drought, famine and cholera which followed in 1866 and 1867 295 Cambridge Histories Online © Cambridge University Press, 2008AFRICA AND THE MUSLIM WEST finally overwhelmed Tunisia. In 1866 the government had to make heavy payments in various annuities and was practically deprived of resources. The bey, faced with bankruptcy, was finally forced to accept the tutelage of an International Financial Commission (5 July 1869). Thus there began the process of internationalization of the Tunisian Question. This agreement established a sort of triple protectorate of France, Italy and Great Britain over the finances of Tunisia, with France pre- dominating: a French inspector of finances sat on the executive Committee. But the defeat of 1871 forced France to adopt a cautious policy in Tunisia, and the Commission on the Debt finally contributed to halting the Italian efforts at penetration. For several years the superior influence of Great Britain ensured a virtual state of equilibrium at Tunis, the British consul even taking advantage of the circumstances to settle, with the agreement of Khayr al-Din, the problem of relations with the Porte: but the firman of 23 October 1871, which reaffirmed the Ottoman sovereignty at Tunis, was to remain a dead letter. The few years of respite from diplomatic complications which Tunisia experienced after 1871 saw a final attempt to rehabilitate the country. On becoming prime minister in October 1873, Khayr al-Din attempted to apply successfully a realistic policy of internal improvements, more fruitful than ambitious but premature constitutional reforms, thus following the principles which he had enunciated in his work Aqwam al masdlik, published in 1867. Khayr al-DIn was able to re-establish financial stability, while paying Tunisia's debt. His intense legislative activity contributed greatly to the making of modern Tunisia: it covered the organization of the administration of the 'habous' (bubus, i.e. n>aqf), the reorganization of justice, the statute concerning share-cropping, the codification of the rules for the corporations, the organization of the teaching at the Zaytuna Mosque, and the foundation of the Sadiqiyya College (1875) with a syllabus which was both traditional and modern. Thanks to more favourable harvests, the economic situation improved and trade revived. The experiment, which seemed as if it would succeed, was, however, short-lived. Given less and less support by the powers, who rejected his project of mixed courts, and who were irritated by his resistance to their enterprises of economic penetration, and subjected